---
title: Address to Black Men on Colonization
author: Abraham Lincoln
date: August 14, 1862
---

This afternoon the President of the United States gave audience to a
Committee of colored men at the White House. 

They were introduced by the Rev. J. Mitchell, Commissioner of
Emigration. E. M. Thomas, the Chairman, remarked that they were there by
invitation to hear what the Executive had to say to them. Having all
been seated, the President, after a few preliminary observations,
informed them that a sum of money had been appropriated by Congress, and
placed at his disposition for the purpose of aiding the colonization in
some country of the people, or a portion of them, of African descent,
thereby making it his duty, as it had for a long time been his
inclination, to favor that cause; and why, he asked, should the people
of your race be colonized, and where? Why should they leave this
country? This is, perhaps, the first question for proper consideration.
You and we are different races. We have between us a broader difference
than exists between almost any other two races. Whether it is right or
wrong I need not discuss, but this physical difference is a great
disadvantage to us both, as I think your race suffer very greatly, many
of them by living among us, while ours suffer from your presence. In a
word we suffer on each side. If this is admitted, it affords a reason at
least why we should be separated. You here are freemen I suppose.

A VOICE: Yes, sir.

The President---Perhaps you have long been free, or all your lives. Your
race are suffering, in my judgment, the greatest wrong
inflicted on any people. But even when you cease to be slaves, you are
yet far removed from being placed on an equality with the white race.
You are cut off from many of the advantages which the other race enjoy.
The aspiration of men is to enjoy equality with the best when free, but
on this broad continent, not a single man of your race is made the equal
of a single man of ours. Go where you are treated the best, and the ban
is still upon you.

I do not propose to discuss this, but to present it as a fact with which
we have to deal. I cannot alter it if I would. It is a fact, about which
we all think and feel alike, I and you. We look to our condition, owing
to the existence of the two races on this continent. I need not recount
to you the effects upon white men, growing out of the institution of
Slavery. I believe in its general evil effects on the white race. See
our present condition---the country engaged in war!---our white men
cutting one another's throats, none knowing how far it will extend; and
then consider what we know to be the truth. But for your race among us
there could not be war, although many men engaged on either side do not
care for you one way or the other. ...

It is better for us both, therefore, to be separated. ... There is an
unwillingness on the part of our people, harsh as it may be, for you
free colored people to remain with us. Now, if you could give a start to
white people, you would open a wide door for many to be made free. ...
The above is merely given as the substance of the President's remarks.

The Chairman of the delegation briefly replied that "they would hold a
consultation and in a short time give an answer." The President said:
"Take your full time---no hurry at all."

The delegation then withdrew.

* * * * *

*Source:* "Address on Colonization to a Deputation of Negroes," in *The
Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln*, ed. Roy P. Basler, vol. 5 (New
Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press, 1953-55), pp. 370-375, online
at <http://quod.lib.umich.edu/l/lincoln/lincoln5/>.

