---
title: Report on the Savannah Colloquy
author: New York Daily Tribune
date: February 13, 1865
abstract:
     This clipping from a Northern newspaper gives an account of a meeting
     between black religious leaders and Union military authorities in 
     Savannah Georgia about one month before. Major General William Tecumseh
     Sherman called the meeting, and the Secretary of War was also present.
---

On the evening of Thursday, the 12th day of January, 1865, the following
persons of African descent met by appointment to hold an interview with
Edwin M. Stanton, Secretary of War, and Major-Gen. Sherman, to have a
conference upon matters relating to the freedmen of the State of
Georgia, to-wit:

*One*: William J. Campbell, aged 51 years, born in Savannah, slave until
1849, and then liberated by will of his mistress, Mrs. May Maxwell. For
ten years pastor of the 1st Baptist Church of Savannah, numbering about
1,800 members. Average congregation, 1,900. The church property
belonging to the congregation. Trustees white. Worth $18,000.

*Two:* John Cox, aged fifty-eight years, born in Savannah; slave until
1849, when he bought his freedom for $1,100. Pastor of the 2d African
Baptist Church. In the ministry fifteen years. Congregation 1,222
persons. Church property worth $10,000, belonging to the congregation.

*Three:* Ulysses L. Houston, aged forty-one years, born in Grahamsville,
S.C.; slave until the Union army entered Savannah. Owned by Moses
Henderson, Savannah, and pastor of Third African Baptist Church.
Congregation numbering 400. Church property worth $5,000; belongs to
congregation. In the ministry about eight years.

*Four:* William Bentley, aged 72 years, born in Savannah, slave until 25
years of age, when his master, John Waters, emancipated him by will.
Pastor of Andrew's Chapel, Methodist Episcopal Church---only one of that
denomination in Savannah; congregation numbering 360 members; church
property worth about $20,000, and is owned by the congregation; been in
the ministry about twenty years; a member of Georgia Conference.

*Five:* Charles Bradwell, aged 40 years, born in Liberty County, Ga.;
slave until 1851; emancipated by will of his master, J. L. Bradwell.
Local preacher in charge of the Methodist Episcopal congregation
(Andrew's Chapel) in the absence of the minister; in the ministry 10
years.

*Six:* William Gaines, aged 41 years; born in Wills Co., Ga. Slave until
the Union forces freed me. Owned by Robert Toombs, formerly United
States Senator, and his brother, Gabriel Toombs, local preacher of the
M.E. Church (Andrew's Chapel.) In the ministry 16 years.

*Seven:* James Hill, aged 52 years; born in Bryan Co., Ga. Slave up to
the time the Union army came in. Owned by H. F. Willings, of Savannah.
In the ministry 16 years.

*Eight:* Glasgon Taylor, aged 72 years, born in Wilkes County, Ga. Slave
until the Union army came; owned by A. P. Wetter. Is a local preacher of
the M.E. Church (Andrew's Chapel.) In the ministry 35 years.

*Nine:* Garrison Frazier, aged 67 years, born in Granville County, N.C.
Slave until eight years ago, when he bought himself and wife, paying
$1,000 in gold and silver. Is an ordained minister in the Baptist
Church, but, his health failing, has now charge of no congregation. Has
been in the ministry 35 years.

*Ten:* James Mills, aged 56 years, born in Savannah; free-born, and is a
licensed preacher of the first Baptist Church. Has been eight years in
the ministry.

*Eleven:* Abraham Burke, aged 48 years, born in Bryan County, Ga. Slave
until 20 years ago, when he bought himself for $800. Has been in the
ministry about 10 years.

*Twelve:* Arthur Wardell, aged 44 years, born in Liberty County, Ga.
Slave until freed by the Union army. Owned by A. A. Solomons, Savannah,
and is a licensed minister in the Baptist Church. Has been in the
ministry 6 years.

*Thirteen:* Alexander Harris, aged 47 years, born in Savannah; free
born. Licensed minister of Third African Baptist Church. Licensed about
one month ago.

*Fourteen:* Andrew Neal, aged 61 years, born in Savannah, slave until
the Union army liberated him. Owned by Mr. Wm. Gibbons, and has been
deacon in the Third Baptist Church for 10 years.

*Fifteen:* Jas. Porter, aged 39 years, born in Charleston, South
Carolina; free-born, his mother having purchased her freedom. Is
lay-reader and president of the board of wardens and vestry of St.
Stephen's Protestant Episcopal Colored Church in Savannah. Has been in
communion 9 years. The congregation numbers about 200 persons. The
church property is worth about $10,000, and is owned by the
congregation.

*Sixteen:* Adolphus Delmotte, aged 28 years, born in Savannah; free
born. Is a licensed minister of the Missionary Baptist Church of
Milledgeville. Congregation numbering about 300 or 400 persons. Has been
in the ministry about two years.

*Seventeen:* Jacob Godfrey, aged 57 years, born in Marion, S.C. Slave
until the Union army freed me; owned by James E. Godfrey---Methodist
preacher now in the Rebel army. Is a class-leader and steward of
Andrew's Chapel since 1836.

*Eighteen:* John Johnson, aged 51 years, born in Bryan County, Georgia.
Slave up to the time the Union army came here; owned by W. W. Lincoln of
Savannah. Is class-leader and treasurer of Andrew's Chapel for sixteen
years.

*Nineteen:* Robt. N. Taylor, aged 51 years, born in Wilkes Co., Ga.
Slave to the time the Union army came. Was owned by Augustus P. Welter,
Savannah, and is class-leader in Andrew's Chapel for nine years.

*Twenty:* Jas. Lynch, aged 26 years, born in Baltimore, Md.; free-born.
Is presiding elder of the M.E. Church and missionary to the department
of the South. Has been seven years in the ministry and two years in the
South.

Garrison Frazier being chosen by the persons present to express their
common sentiments upon the matters of inquiry, makes answers to
inquiries as follows:

*First:* State what your understanding is in regard to the acts of
Congress and President Lincoln's [*Emancipation*] proclamation, touching
the condition of the colored people in the Rebel States.

*Answer*---So far as I understand President Lincoln's proclamation to the
Rebellious States, it is, that if they would lay down their arms and
submit to the laws of the United States before the first of January,
1863, all should be well; but if they did not, then all the slaves in
the Rebel States should be free henceforth and forever. That is what I
understood.

*Second*---State what you understand by Slavery and the freedom that was
to be given by the President's proclamation.

*Answer*---Slavery is, receiving by *irresistible power* the work of
another man, and not by his *consent*. The freedom, as I understand it,
promised by the proclamation, is taking us from under the yoke of
bondage, and placing us where we could reap the fruit of our own labor,
take care of ourselves and assist the Government in maintaining our
freedom.

*Third:* State in what manner you think you can take care of yourselves,
and how can you best assist the Government in maintaining your freedom.

*Answer:* The way we can best take care of ourselves is to have land,
and turn it and till it by our own labor---that is, by the labor of the
women and children and old men; and we can soon maintain ourselves and
have something to spare. And to assist the Government, the young men
should enlist in the service of the Government, and serve in such manner
as they may be wanted. (The Rebels told us that they piled them up and
made batteries of them, and sold them to Cuba; but we don't believe
that.) We want to be placed on land until we are able to buy it and make
it our own.

*Fourth:* State in what manner you would rather live---whether scattered
among the whites or in colonies by yourselves.

*Answer:* I would prefer to live by ourselves, for there is a prejudice
against us in the South that will take years to get over; but I do not
know that I can answer for my brethren. [Mr. Lynch says he thinks they
should not be separated, but live together. All the other persons
present, being questioned one by one, answer that they agree with
Brother Frazier.]^[Note the different biography of Mr. Lynch compared
to the other black delegates to the meeting.]

*Fifth:* Do you think that there is intelligence enough among the slaves
of the South to maintain themselves under the Government of the United
States and the equal protection of its laws, and maintain good and
peaceable relations among yourselves and with your neighbors?

*Answer*---I think there is sufficient intelligence among us to do so.

(...)

*Seventh:* State whether the sentiments you now express are those only
of the colored people in the city; or do they extend to the colored
population through the country? and what are your means of knowing the
sentiments of those living in the country?

*Answer:* I think the sentiments are the same among the colored people
of the State. My opinion is formed by personal communication in the
course of my ministry, and also from the thousands that followed the
Union army, leaving their homes and undergoing suffering. I did not
think there would be so many; the number surpassed my expectation.
