---
title: Letter from Galveston
author: Hawkins Wilson
date: May 11, 1867
abstract: |
     Hawkins Wilson was a formerly enslaved man living in Texas who had been 
     sold there from Virginia as a young man. In this letter, written after the
     Civil War, Wilson asks Freedmen's Bureau agents to help him locate his
     long-lost relatives.
---

Dear Sir, I am anxious to learn about my sisters, from whom I have been
separated many years--- I have never heard of them since I left Virginia twenty
four years ago--- I am in hopes that they are still living and I am anxious to
hear how they are getting on--- I have no other one to apply to but you and am
persuaded that you will help one who stands in need of your services as I do---
I shall be grateful to you, if you oblige me in this matter--- One of my
sisters belonged to Peter Coleman in Caroline County and her name was Jane---
Her husband's name was Charles and he belonged to Buck Haskin and lived near
John Wright's store in the same county--- She had three children, Robert,
Charles and Julia, when I left--- Sister Martha belonged to Dr. Jefferson, who
lived two miles above Wright's store--- Sister Matilda belonged to Mrs. Botts,
in the same county--- My dear uncle Jim had a wife at Jack Langley's and his
wife was named Adie and his oldest son was named Buck and they all belonged to
Jack Langley--- These are all my own dearest relatives and I wish to correspond
with them with a view to visit them as soon as I can hear from them--- My name
is Hawkins Wilson and I am their brother, who was sold at Sheriff's sale and
used to belong to Jackson Talley and was bought by M. Wright, Boydtown
C.H.^[Wilson recalls being sold at a courthouse ("C.H.") in a "Sheriff's sale,"
which means he was likely sold by court order to settle an owner's debt or
estate.] You will please send the enclosed letter to my sister Jane, or some of
her family, if she is dead--- I am, very respectfully, your obedient servant,

Hawkins Wilson

-----

Dear Sister Jane, Your little brother Hawkins is trying to find out where you
are and where his poor old mother is--- Let me know and I will come to see
you--- I shall never forget the bag of biscuits you made for me the last night
I spent with you--- Your advice to me to meet you in Heaven has never passed
from my mind and I have endeavored to live as near to my God, that if He saw
fit not to suffer us to meet on earth, we might indeed meet in Heaven--- I was
married in this city on the 10th March 1867 by Rev. Samuel Osborn to Mrs.
Martha White, a very intelligent and lady-life woman--- You may readily suppose
that I was not fool enough to marry a Texas girl--- My wife was from Georgia
and was raised in that state and will make me very happy--- I have learned to
read, and write a little--- I teach Sunday School and have a very interesting
class--- If you do not mind, when I come, I will astonish you in religious
affairs--- I am sexton of the Methodist Episcopal Church colored--- I hope you
and all my brothers and sisters in Virginia will stand up to this church; for
I expect to live and die in the same--- When I meet you, I shall be as much
overjoyed as Joseph was when he and his father met after they had been
separated so long---^[Wilson refers to the biblical story of Joseph in the book
of Genesis. After being sold by his brothers as a slave to Egypt, Joseph was
later reunited with his family.] Please write me all the news about you all---
I am writing tonight all about myself and I want you to do likewise about your
and my relations in the state of Virginia--- Please send me some of Julia's
hair whom I left a baby in the cradle when I was torn away from you--- [...]

