---
title: Reminiscences of the Civil War
author: John Brown Gordon
date: 1904
---

The strong and salutary characteristics of both Lee and Grant should
live in history as an inspiration to coming generations. Posterity will
find nobler and more wholesome incentives in their high attributes as
men than in their brilliant careers as warriors. The lustre of a
stainless life is more lasting than the fame of any soldier; and if
General Lee's self-abnegation, his unblemished purity, his triumph over
alluring temptations, and his unwavering consecration to all life's
duties do not lift him to the morally sublime and make him a fit ideal
for young men to follow, then no human conduct can achieve such
position.

And the repeated manifestations of General Grant's truly great
qualities---his innate modesty, his freedom from every trace of
vain-glory or ostentation, his magnanimity in victory, his genuine
sympathy for his brave and sensitive foemen, and his inflexible resolve
to protect paroled Confederates against any assault, and vindicate, at
whatever cost, the sanctity of his pledge to the vanquished---will give
him a place in history no less renowned [...]

Scarcely less prominent in American annals than the record of these two
lives, should stand a catalogue of the thrilling incidents which
illustrate the nobler phase of soldier life so inadequately described in
these reminiscences. The unseemly things which occurred in the great
conflict between the States should be forgotten, or at least forgiven,
and no longer permitted to disturb complete harmony between North and
South. American youth in all sections should be taught to hold in
perpetual remembrance all that was great and good on both sides; to
comprehend the inherited convictions for which saintly women suffered
and patriotic men died; to recognize the unparalleled carnage as proof
of unrivalled courage; to appreciate the singular absence of personal
animosity and the frequent manifestation between those brave antagonists
of a good-fellowship such as had never before been witnessed between
hostile armies. It will be a glorious day for our country when all the
children within its borders shall learn that the four years of
fratricidal^["Fratricidal" refers to violent conflict between siblings.]
war between the North and the South was waged by neither with criminal
or unworthy intent, but by both to protect what they conceived to be
threatened rights and imperilled liberty; that the issues which divided
the sections were born when the Republic was born and were forever
buried in an ocean of fraternal blood. [...] So the Republic, rising
from its baptism of blood with a national life more robust ... shall go
forever forward in its benign mission to humanity.

* * * * *

*Source:* John Brown Gordon, *Reminiscences of the Civil War* (New York:
Scribner's, 1904), available online at
<http://docsouth.unc.edu/fpn/gordon/>.

